oneDNN v3.8 release notes (#3064)
uxlfoundation/oneDNN: RELEASE_NOTES.md

* Improved performance of `int8` convolution support with zero points.
* Improved `fp32` convolution performance with `fp16` and `bf16` compressed weights on processors with Intel AVX2 or Intel AVX-512 instruction set support.
* Improved `fp16`/`bf16` depthwise convolution performance with `fp32` bias or `sum` post-ops or dilation.
* Improved `bf16` pooling backpropagation performance.
* Improved binary post-ops performance with `per_w` broadcast.

## Intel Graphics Products
* Improved performance on Intel GPUs based on Xe3 architecture.
* Improved convolution performance on:
  * Intel Arc Graphics for Intel Core Ultra (Series 2, formerly Lunar Lake).
  * Intel Arc B-series discrete graphics (formerly Battlemage).
* Improved `int8` matmul performance with zero-points support for source and weight tensors.
* Improved `f4_e2m1` and `f4_e3m0` matmul and reorder performance.
* Improved performance of the following subgraphs with Graph API:
  * [Scaled Dot Product Attention (SDPA)] with `int4` and `int8` [compressed key and value].
  * `fp16`/`bf16` SDPA with `fp32` intermediate data types. Using `fp32` intermediate data types is recommended.

>   * SDPA with head size 512 and 576.

Reviewer: Hi @syurkevi, could you please confirm if this is accurate?

Reviewer 2: Yes, this was discussed in PR #2976.

> # Performance Optimizations

Author: @sgeor255 @Rbiessy could you please help with release notes content for NVIDIA backend and generic SYCL kernels?

Reviewer 3: Thanks I added a couple of suggestions below.

> ## Intel Architecture Processors

Author: @tprimak Could you please review and update section if required?

* Improved matmul performance on Intel Xeon processors with Intel AMX instruction set support.
* Improved `fp16`/`bf16` depthwise convolution performance with `fp32` bias or `sum` post-op.
* Improved `bf16` pooling backpropagation performance.
* Improved binary post-op performance with `per_w` broadcast.

## Intel Graphics Products
* Improved performance for Intel GPUs based on Xe3 architecture.
* Improved convolution performance on Intel Arc Graphics for Intel Core Ultra processors (Series 2) (formerly Lunar Lake) and Intel Arc B-series discrete graphics (formerly Battlemage).
* Improved `int8` matmul performance with zero points for source and weight tensors.
* Improved performance of the following subgraphs with Graph API:
	* Scaled Dot Product Attention (SDPA) with `int4` and `int8` KV cache.
	* SDPA with bottom-right implicit causal mask.
	* SDPA with head size between 257 and 512.
	* Grouped Query Attention (GQA) with 5D input tensors.

> ## AArch64-based Processors

Reviewer 4: @vgvozdeva Great, thank you so much.

* Improved convolution performance on Intel Arc Graphics for Intel Core Ultra processors (Series 2) (formerly Lunar Lake) and Intel Arc B-series discrete graphics (formerly Battlemage).
* Improved `int8` matmul performance with zero points for source and weight tensors.
* Improved performance of the following subgraphs with Graph API:
	* Scaled Dot Product Attention (SDPA) with `int4` and `int8` KV cache.
	* SDPA with bottom-right implicit causal mask.
	* SDPA with head size between 257 and 512.
	* Grouped Query Attention (GQA) with 5D input tensors.

## AArch64-based Processors
TBD
# Functionality
## Common
* Introduced select algorithm support in [binary primitive](https://uxlfoundation.github.io/oneDNN/v3.8/dev_guide_binary.html). The functionality is implemented on CPUs and Intel GPUs.

## Intel Graphics Products
* Introduced support for [GenIndex](https://oneapi-src.github.io/oneDNN/v3.8/dev_guide_op_genindex.html) operation in Graph API.

## Intel Architecture Processors
* Introduced support for `f32` convolution with `fp16` compressed weights.
* Enabled support for int8 or int4 compressed weights in matmul primitive. This functionality is implemented on Intel CPUs.

> 

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion

## Generic SYCL backend
* Introduced support for RNN Vanilla primitive forward propagation.
* Introduced support for inner product primitive backward propagation.
* Introduced support for group normalization primitive.
* Improved precision of inner product primitive with sum post-op for larger shapes.

```

## NVIDIA GPUs
* Introduces Graph API support.

# Usability
 
* Added support for group normalization primitive with [ONEDNN_ENABLE_PRIMITIVE](https://uxlfoundation.github.io/oneDNN/dev_guide_build_options.html#onednn-enable-primitive) build option.
* Enabled ROCm 6 support for AMD GPUs.

> 

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
* Improved CMake integration when installing oneDNN with the Nvidia backend enabled.

```

# Validation
* Added benchdnn option [`--execution-mode`](https://github.com/uxlfoundation/oneDNN/blob/rls-v3.8/tests/benchdnn/doc/knobs_common.md#--execution-mode) to test oneDNN functionality with SYCL Graph record/execute mode.
* Extended benchdnn option [`--cold-cache`](https://github.com/uxlfoundation/oneDNN/blob/main/tests/benchdnn/doc/knob_cold_cache.md) with support for cold TLB mode.
* Added benchdnn option `--bia-dt` to control bias data type for matmul, inner product, convolution, and deconvolution.
* Extended syntax of benchdnn `--dt` option in [Graph API driver](https://github.com/uxlfoundation/oneDNN/blob/main/tests/benchdnn/doc/driver_graph.md) to manage data types of individual tensors in a pattern.

# Deprecated Functionality

# Breaking Changes

> * Removed experimental [Graph Compiler](https://oneapi-src.github.io/oneDNN/v3.6/dev_guide_graph_compiler.html) backend.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* Removed experimental [Graph Compiler](https://uxlfoundation.github.io/oneDNN/v3.7/dev_guide_graph_compiler.html) backend.
```

# Performance Optimizations

> ## Intel Architecture Processors

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
## Intel(R) Architecture Processors
```

> * Improved matmul performance on Intel Xeon processors with Intel AMX instruction set support.

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
* Improved matmul performance on Intel(R) Xeon(R) processors with support for the Intel(R) AMX instruction set.
```

> * Improved `fp16`/`bf16` depthwise convolution performance with `fp32` bias or `sum` post-op.

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
* Improved `fp16`/`bf16` depthwise convolution performance with `fp32` bias or `sum` post-operations.
```

* Improved `bf16` pooling backpropagation performance.

> * Improved binary post-op performance with `per_w` broadcast.

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
* Improved binary post-ops performance with `per_w` broadcast.
```

> ## Intel Graphics Products

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
## Intel(R) Graphics
```

> * Improved performance for Intel GPUs based on Xe3 architecture.

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
* Improved performance on Intel(R) GPUs based on Xe3 architecture.
```

> * Improved convolution performance on Intel Arc Graphics for Intel Core Ultra processors (Series 2) (formerly Lunar Lake) and Intel Arc B-series discrete graphics (formerly Battlemage).

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
* Improved convolution performance on:
   * Intel® Arc™ Graphics for Intel® Core™ Ultra (Series 2, formerly Lunar Lake).
   * Intel® Arc™ B-series discrete graphics (formerly Battlemage).
```

> * Improved `int8` matmul performance with zero points for source and weight tensors.

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
* Improved `int8` matmul performance with zero-points support for source and weight tensors.
```

> * Improved performance of the following subgraphs with Graph API:

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
* Improved Graph API performance for:
```

	* Scaled Dot Product Attention (SDPA) with `int4` and `int8` KV cache.

> 	* SDPA with bottom-right implicit causal mask.

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
	* SDPA with bottom-right implicit causal masking.
```

	* SDPA with head size between 257 and 512.
	* Grouped Query Attention (GQA) with 5D input tensors.

> ## AArch64-based Processors

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
## AArch64-Based Processors
```

> * Enabled BF16 forward-mode inner product via ACL. 170x and 160x speedups for BERT and AlexNet in torch compile-mode.

Reviewer 5: not sure if i understand it correctly, but if i do, i would try to make it a little bit clearer. Maybe smth like:

* Enabled BF16 forward-mode inner product via ACL with the speedups:
   * BERT: up to 170x
   * AlexNet: up to 160x (torch compile mode)

Reviewer 2: I'd suggest dropping the second sentence alltogether as it refers to PyTorch and not sufficiently qualified.

> * Enabled post-ops in jit_sve_1x1 conv. Yields 1.2x-1.4x speedups for 1x1 kernel problems.

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
* Enabled post-ops in ` jit_sve_1x1` convolution (1.2x-1.4x speedups for 1x1 kernel problems).
```

> * Prefer jit_sve conv where faster. Yields 1.3x-3x speedups on average.

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
* Preferential use of `jit_sve` convolution when faster (1.3x–3x average speedups).
```

# Functionality
## Common
* Introduced select algorithm support in [binary primitive](https://uxlfoundation.github.io/oneDNN/v3.8/dev_guide_binary.html). The functionality is implemented on CPUs and Intel GPUs.

> ## Intel Graphics Products

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
## Intel(R) Graphics 
```

> * Introduced support for [GenIndex](https://oneapi-src.github.io/oneDNN/v3.8/dev_guide_op_genindex.html) operation in Graph API.

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
* Introduced support for the [GenIndex](https://oneapi-src.github.io/oneDNN/v3.8/dev_guide_op_genindex.html) operation in Graph API.
```

> ## Intel Architecture Processors

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
## Intel(R) Architecture Processors
```

* Introduced support for `f32` convolution with `fp16` compressed weights.
* Enabled support for int8 or int4 compressed weights in matmul primitive. This functionality is implemented on Intel CPUs.

> ## Generic SYCL backend

Reviewer 3: Why the `*`?

> ## Generic SYCL backend

Reviewer 5: because SYCL is a trademark of the Khronos Group Inc.

> ## Generic SYCL backend

Reviewer 2: These requirements do not apply to UXL Foundation materials.

* Introduced support for RNN Vanilla primitive forward propagation.
* Introduced support for inner product primitive backward propagation.
* Introduced support for group normalization primitive.
* Improved precision of inner product primitive with sum post-op for larger shapes.

## AArch64-based Processors

> * Enabled FP16 for JIT reorder kernels.

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
* Enabled `fp16` support for JIT reorder kernels.
```

> * Enabled matmul static quantization.

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
* Enabled static quantization in matmul operations.
```

> ## NVIDIA GPUs

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
## NVIDIA* GPUs
```

> * Introduces Graph API support.

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
* Introduced Graph API support.
```

# Usability
 

> * Added support for group normalization primitive with [ONEDNN_ENABLE_PRIMITIVE](https://uxlfoundation.github.io/oneDNN/dev_guide_build_options.html#onednn-enable-primitive) build option.

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
* Added support for Group Normalization primitive with [`ONEDNN_ENABLE_PRIMITIVE`](https://uxlfoundation.github.io/oneDNN/dev_guide_build_options.html#onednn-enable-primitive) build option.
```

> * Enabled ROCm 6 support for AMD GPUs.

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
* Enabled support for ROCm 6 on AMD* GPUs.
```

> * Improved CMake integration when installing oneDNN with the Nvidia backend enabled.

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
* Improved CMake* integration for oneDNN installation with NVIDIA* backend.
```

Reviewer 2: @aepanchi, what's up with `*`?

Reviewer 5: We should clearly indicate the trademarks. The * means that all names and brands may be claimed as the property of others. You have it in your [README.md](https://github.com/uxlfoundation/oneDNN/blob/main/README.md#trademark-information) as well.

Reviewer 2: These requirements do not apply to UXL Foundation materials.

> ## AArch64-based Processors

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
## AArch64-Based Processors
```

>  * Default the number of threads to max for acl_threadpool. Fixes a crash in Tensorflow.

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
 * Defaulted thread count to max in `acl_threadpool` to prevent crashes in TensorFlow*.
```

>  * Fixed scratchpad being ignored for some GEMMs. Reduces memory and speeds up execution.

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
 * Fixed scratchpad usage issue for GEMMs. Reduced memory and sped up execution.
```

Reviewer 5: or: Resolved GEMM scratchpad usage issues, reducing memory footprint and boosting speed.

Depending on the meaning.

Reviewer 2: Also this needs to be reformulated in terms of oneDNN function names, as 'GEMM' is an internal detail.

Reviewer 2: Yes, 'matmul' looks right.

Reviewer 4: Okay thanks. 
@vgvozdeva Would you be making this edit on your side? I'm happy to push to a branch if it helps.

Author: @Sqvid Could you please help to summarize changes and push? I will really appreciate your help!

Reviewer 4: @vgvozdeva I have pushed the changes on [this branch](https://github.com/uxlfoundation/oneDNN/tree/sqvid/release_notes_3.8) (rebased onto yours). I see you have added many of them already, thank you so much.

Reviewer 4: @vgvozdeva @vpirogov My branch is still up, would it be easier if I pushed to vgvozdeva/release_notes_3.8 directly instead?

Author: @Sqvid Yes, could you please merge directly to my branch? Thank you in advance!

Reviewer 4: Done. Please let me know if it's okay.

Reviewer 4: @vgvozdeva Ah apologies, I forgot to format the commit message correctly, are you okay with a force-push?

Author: @Sqvid yes

Reviewer 4: Done.

>  * Fixed a bug in FP32 reorders where ACL would return incorrect results.

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
 * Fixed a bug in `fp32` reorders where ACL returned incorrect results.
```

# Validation

> * Added benchdnn option [`--execution-mode`](https://github.com/uxlfoundation/oneDNN/blob/rls-v3.8/tests/benchdnn/doc/knobs_common.md#--execution-mode) to test oneDNN functionality with SYCL Graph record/execute mode.

Reviewer 5: would combine: 
* `benchdnn`:
   * Added  `--execution-mode` to test oneDNN functionality with SYCL* Graph record/execute mode.
   * Extended `--cold-cache` with cold TLB mode support.
   * Added `--bia-dt` to control bias data types in matmul, inner product, convolution, and deconvolution.
   * Extended `--dt` syntax in Graph API driver for per-tensor data type specification.

* Extended benchdnn option [`--cold-cache`](https://github.com/uxlfoundation/oneDNN/blob/main/tests/benchdnn/doc/knob_cold_cache.md) with support for cold TLB mode.
* Added benchdnn option `--bia-dt` to control bias data type for matmul, inner product, convolution, and deconvolution.
* Extended syntax of benchdnn `--dt` option in [Graph API driver](https://github.com/uxlfoundation/oneDNN/blob/main/tests/benchdnn/doc/driver_graph.md) to manage data types of individual tensors in a pattern.

# Deprecated Functionality

# Breaking Changes

> * Removed experimental [Graph Compiler](https://uxlfoundation.github.io/oneDNN/v3.7/dev_guide_graph_compiler.html) backend.

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
* Removed the experimental [Graph Compiler](https://uxlfoundation.github.io/oneDNN/v3.7/dev_guide_graph_compiler.html) backend.
```

> # Thanks to these Contributors

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
# Thanks to Contributors
```

> This release contains contributions from the project core team as well as Alexander Simonov @asimonov1, Denis @redradist, Dmitriy Ovchinnikov @inteldimitrius, Eliezer Weissmann @eliezerweissmann, Hubert Maciak @hmaciak, Ilya Lavrenov @ilya-lavrenov, James McGregor @Jmc18134, Marek Michalowski @michalowski-arm, Maria Zhukova @mzhukova, Orel Yehuda @yehudaorel, Ravi Pushkar @rpushkarr, Renato Barros Arantes @renato-arantes, Shreyas-fuj @Shreyas-fuj, Shu Chen @shu1chen, Viktoriia Gvozdeva @vgvozdeva, Yair Obodovsky @yair-obodovsky, hmaciak @hmaciak, jstachowintel @jstachowintel, zhangfei @zhangfeiv0, James McGregor @Jmc18134, Marek Michalowski @michalowski-arm, Renato Barros Arantes @renato-arantes.

Reviewer 5: I would leave the usernames only, or put them in the brackets to improve readability.

* Improved performance of `int8` convolution support with zero points.
* Improved `fp32` convolution performance with `fp16` and `bf16` compressed weights on processors with Intel AVX2 and AVX512 instruction set support.
* Improved `fp16`/`bf16` depthwise convolution performance with `fp32` bias or `sum` post-ops or dilation.
* Improved `bf16` pooling backpropagation performance.
* Improved binary post-ops performance with `per_w` broadcast.

## Intel Graphics Products
* Improved performance on Intel GPUs based on Xe3 architecture.
* Improved convolution performance on:
 * Intel Arc Graphics for Intel Core Ultra (Series 2, formerly Lunar Lake).
 * Intel Arc B-series discrete graphics (formerly Battlemage).
* Improved `int8` matmul performance with zero-points support for source and weight tensors.
* Improved matmul and reorder performance for 4-bit floating-point data types `f4_e2m1` and `f4_e3m0`. Compute primitives provide support through internal converison into f16 as current Intel GPUs lack native support.
* Improved performance of the following subgraphs with Graph API:
 * Scaled Dot Product Attention (SDPA) with `int4` and `int8` KV cache.

>  * SDPA with bottom-right implicit causal mask.

Reviewer: We decided to not backport the bottom-right causal mask to rls-v3.8. Let remove it and add below:

```
* Differentiated SDPA with f32 or bf16/f16 intermediate data types. Now only SDPA with f32 intermediate data type will dispatch to the optimized kernels on Intel Graphics Products.
```

Reviewer 2: Done.

 * SDPA with head size 512 and 576.
 * Grouped Query Attention (GQA) with 5D input tensors.

## AArch64-based Processors
* Improved `fp16` reorder performance.
* Improved `int8` matmul performance.
* Improved `bf16` inner product forward propagation performance with Arm Compute Library (ACL).
* Improved convolution performance on processors with SVE support with Arm Compute Library (ACL).

# Functionality
## Intel Graphics Products

> * Introduced support for the [GenIndex](https://oneapi-src.github.io/oneDNN/v3.8/dev_guide_op_genindex.html) operation in Graph API.

Reviewer: This is already part of v3.7. Suggest to remove it.

Reviewer 2: This line refers to PR #2727. Is the description incorrect?

Reviewer: Oh, I see. The operation itself was introduced in v3.7 and now we added GPU reference implementation for it in v3.8.

* Introduced select algorithm support in [binary primitive](https://uxlfoundation.github.io/oneDNN/v3.8/dev_guide_binary.html). The functionality is optimized for Intel GPUs.
* Introduced optimized support for 4-bit floating-point data types `f4_e2m1` and `f4_e3m0` in convolution on Intel(R) Data Center GPU Max Series or newer Intel GPUs.

> * Extended support for 4-bit floating-point data types in matmul and reorder.

Reviewer: ```
* Extended softmax operation to support `inf_as_zero` mode in Graph API.
* Extended SDPA implementations to respect the `inf_as_zero` mode of softmax and return zeros when the attention masks are all -infinity.
```
